Hello and welcome to the Software Freedom Podcast.
Thank you so much for listening to this podcast and without you and your support, this
podcast would not be possible.
Thank you so much for being there and donating to the FSFE or also for sharing the Software
Freedom Podcast.
Thank you, our dear dear listener.
This podcast is brought to you by the Free Software Foundation Europe.
We are a charity that empowers users to control technology and I'm Bonnie Mehring.
Today, we are here with two guests.
Our first guest is Petteri Kivimäki, the CTO of the Nordic Institute for Interoperability
Solutions, also called NIIS.
Hello Petteri, I'm very, very happy that you made it to the Software Freedom Podcast.
Thank you so much for the time.
Hello, thank you very much for the invitation and I'm very glad to be here today.
Also on my side, I'm very happy.
We also have a second guest today and that's my colleague Johannes Näder from the Free
Software Foundation Europe.
Hello Johannes, thank you so much for making time as well and thank you so much for joining
us here today in our talk.
Hi, Bonnie, hi Petteri.
Yeah, it's good to be back.
So in this podcast, we will be talking about public code and public administrations, but
before we get to the core, Petteri, can you give us some background and let our listeners
know how you first came in contact with Free Software?
Yeah, certainly.
I think that the very first contact with Free Software was probably almost, well, 20 years
ago, when I started to do programming, so I started with PHP and then Java and of course
many libraries that I was using, they were Free Software, even if back then I didn't
pay much thought to it.
But then later, when I worked at the National Library of Finland, I got more involved with
open source and how open source is used in different kind of projects on a national level.
And then, of course, later with X-Road, it has played even more important role in my
work and also when it comes to my hobbies that I do at my spare time.
Oh, so you have like a deep rooted connection with Free Software there?
Is it usual that in Finland Free Software is around in libraries and that it's like available?
Yeah, nowadays it's quite common.
So the National Library of Finland, they are hosting some national services for other
libraries and for citizens that are based on open source, then they also do some hosting
services and they are using open source software for that.
They also have many, many developers working directly for them and they are well, kind
of a development house and they also contribute to open source projects.
So one could say that it plays very important role in that sector or some people may be
it's surprising but yeah, I've been working in the library sector before so yeah, for
me, it's kind of natural because libraries also work with open data, open access so why
not open source as well.
Johannes, what's your take on it?
Yeah, for me, it's pretty much the same and I would say this is a, yeah, of course, a personal
thing and personal IT use and also then the society component of it.
For personal or the person, my personal view and my personal experience, it became
important so soon after I bought my first computer back when I was a teenager so long
time ago and of course it came with a proprietary operating system and proprietary software preinstalled
and I never had a choice there.
So this idea of having a choice when you start using Free Software, this already was
something, yeah, something new and intriguing and important for me back at the time and
then also seeing that I actually would be in the position to have control over what
my computer does to my data to the things I do with the computer, how I can control
what the computer does, how I can change the way the computer does things, the software
does things, this really became more and more important to me so this idea of controlling
ever more important part of my life, the digital life.
Yeah, the society component is pretty much the same in a large scale so if we as a society
want to be able to control the infrastructure, the digital infrastructure that we rely on
that is very, very important for every aspect of society, also for our democracy, also
for politics and for how our administrations work, then I think Free Software is the
way to go and the only way to go because only with Free Software we can be free of dependencies
from just one vendor who can have the control over this state infrastructure, this public
administration infrastructure and I think it's important to now regain this digital sovereignty
through Free Software and I think this works only with Free Software, there's no other
way than using it.
I find this very, thank you both for sharing yourselves and I find it very interesting
that both of you focus on digital sovereignty, has this always been our, has this just in
the recent debates changed also your perspective on Free Software because sometimes we interact
with society and this also changes our perspective so I'm wondering did this interaction also
give something back to you and help or enhanced you a few on Free Software there?
Well, at least I can say that my view, it has changed a little bit over the years, I
mean digital sovereignty, yes, it has always been an important aspect but the importance
it has grown during the recent years, well in general if you look around what's happening
happening in the world around us, I think it's very important for both individuals, organizations
and also entire administrations to have digital sovereignty.
Absolutely, absolutely, Johannes, you want to add?
Yeah, looking back, so maybe 20 years ago I didn't have those words but it was the idea
of digital sovereignty of course, back at the time and I think during the last years,
especially the last maybe two or three or maybe six years, this became stronger and I'm having
the feeling that also, yeah, throughout our society, across our society, there's a new
sensitivity for this topic and many people who didn't know or you could have talked to them
about digital sovereignty, they wouldn't have understood what this is about and for sure,
that wouldn't have said this is something really really important for our society and I think
this is slowly changing now, yes, and this is good. Absolutely, I'm hooked, I'm hooked on a story
there, so we all see that digital sovereignty for society has become more important over the years,
right? And we are working on this obviously with public money, public code, Johannes, you will say
something about that in a few minutes, but before we get started with the whole discussion,
if you are from NIIS, a nonprofit that was working for several countries and regions to develop
digital infrastructure for public administration, you obviously also see digital sovereignty as an
important topic. Can you tell us a bit more on how NIIS is working on this topic and how you as an
organization want to ensure digital sovereignty for Europe? Yeah, absolutely, so NIIS is a non-profit
association which mission is to develop digital government solutions to its members and currently
we have eight members all in all European, well, seven of them European and then we have a
date back from from Canada and yeah, we develop digital government solutions that are
published as open source based on our members needs and requirements, so basically the idea is
is joint development, the members they all contribute to the development by paying annual members
and then NIIS uses that money to develop different digital government solutions based on the
requirements coming from our members, so basically instead of developing these solutions individually
and managing all the aspects related to the development individually, NIIS is handling the development
for all our members and of course it makes it a lot more efficient when it's when it's done like
that because if everyone needs to handle all the different aspects separately, then they end up
doing the same thing multiple times and it creates a lot of overhead, so we kind of try to
minimize the overhead which means that we can spend more resources on the actual development and
besides concrete software development, we also facilitate the collaboration between our member
organizations, so even it's the kind of the development aspect, it's the biggest thing that we do
but we do many other things as well, including facilitating collaboration between our members.
How did this all start? So it's basically all the Nordic, not all the Nordic countries, but who else
was part of NIIS and how did you all come together because they have different point of use and they
obviously also have different interests sometimes, how does this work?
Yeah, so NIIS was originally established in 2017 by the governments of Estonia and Finland
and the story behind NIIS, it actually already started in 2013, back then the Estonian and Finnish prime
ministers met and the Estonian prime minister handed over the source code of extra data exchange
layer to the Finnish prime minister and then in 2014 Finland kicked off a very big digitization
and one of the goals of the project was to use X-Road to implement a national data exchange
layering in Finland and originally the aim was that Finland implements X-Roads
starts using it no additional development required, however things didn't go exactly like that and
eventually Finland needed to start develop X-Road and back then Estonia was also developing
X-Road at the same time but from the beginning it was clear that Finland and Estonia they wanted
to develop the same piece of software together and not to have Estonian work and Finnish work
and initially the joint development was done by coordinating the daily development activities
by the public authorities of both countries who were responsible for running them but pretty soon
it came here that it wasn't the best possible way of doing things which is why the idea of the
joint organization was born and yeah then things evolved and yeah in 2017 NIIS was established
and the following year the X-Road development activities were hand-dropper to NIIS from Estonia
and Finland so but even it everything kind of started around X-Road from the beginning the idea
of NIIS was wider joint organization for digital collaboration not just for for X-Road development
but but we started with that in practice and then during the following years we got new members
some of them are countries and some of them are states of federal countries or also autonomous regions
but the current members are Estonia, Finland, Iceland,
Ukraine, Schleswig-Holstein, Québec, the Faroe Islands, the Government of Åland. So all in all
we have today eight members and we are not a closed organization so we are also actively looking
for or new member organizations to join especially from Europe and you don't need to be a
Nordic country as I just here as well right yeah yeah that's not a requirement but yeah it
originally yes NIIS was originated by by the Nordic countries but but today yeah you don't
need to be a Nordic country in order to be a member just so that we get the word out there yeah
that that was a very good clarification also as in Germany only the most Nordic states joints
X-Road so far but maybe that can also spread basically right below Denmark so almost Nordic almost
okay you already mentioned X-Road what is X-Road can you give us a very very brief overview and yeah
just let us let our listeners gain on the secret here yeah so X-Road is an open source solution for
secure data exchange between organizations if it's an open source solution licensed under the MIT
license it's one of the most deployed digital public infrastructure components around the world
and it's also digital public could verify it by the digital public could alliance originally
it was developed in Estonia already over 25 years ago but today there are at least 30 countries
around the world using it the most typical way to use it is as a national data exchange solution
for example that's how it used in Estonia and and in Finland but it can also be used for for
other kind of use cases so that's a very short recap of what X-Road is and what it does thank you
very much for the introduction Johannes before we dive into the challenges that are ahead of all
for all of us can you say can you briefly tell us also in that more general kind of you how
is "Public Money? Public Code!" currently doing what's the status there and where are we on a European
level yeah sure but let me first say I think so it's it's really great to talk about X-Road and
needs today and I think it's in many ways a good example for how "Public Money? Public Code!" is
meant to work and it can work really really well especially with the aspect of corporation across
borders the corporation across states and this is yeah I think really great example for
"Public Money? Public Code!" in practice yeah talking about "Public Money? Public Code!" this initiative
started or we as Free Software Foundation Europe started it around I think eight years ago or maybe
already nine years ago with a very simple demand software paid by the paid for by the public should
be available to the public as Free Software so if it's public money then it should be public code
and this is still our call message so what's the situation today the good news first across Europe
we see more awareness than a few years ago we talked about this there's a change in dual geopolitical
situation it's one of the reasons for that digital sovereignty interoperability and also reducing
vandalogue in are now widely discussed I think also lots of decision makers understand why this
is important for our societies and there are also more and more practical initiatives to turn
this into action we currently see a strong movement away from proprietary software especially from
the United States for example in France where currently lots of tools are replaced and also windows
as being replaced by Linux for example in Switzerland there are no recent plays that demand the release
of newly newly developed software to be released as Free Software in Denmark and dependency on US
software companies proprietary US software companies has become a national security threat in the
course of the debate around US the United States trying to take over Greenland especially in Denmark
regular people on the street suddenly start talking about digital sovereignty and why this is
important it's not just an expert debate any any longer and in Germany one more example and I
could tell you many more of many more examples but in Germany Free Software has become is becoming a
strategic component of the so-called Germany Stack but and now comes the but at the same time free
software has not yet become the default improvement and legislation there's still a long way to go
to often Free Software is treated as an exception or as a nice add-on instead of the normal way
to build public digital infrastructure and recently we have seen a shift in the debate around
digital sovereignty and I think this is remarkable as it's also dangerous for the whole
yeah debate around "Public Money? Public Code!" and Free Software and public administrations
because European industry lobby suggests trying to suggest that states can become digital sovereign
by just switching to European vendors no matter if the software products are proprietary
and I would say this neglects the risk of replacing all dependencies by new ones this time only from
European vendors what if they go bankrupt those European proprietary software vendors what if they
decide to relocate outside Europe what if they are taken over by Chinese or by United States
corporations where does that leave Europe and where does that leave our digital sovereignty
yeah the debate around digital sovereignty definitely helps "Public Money? Public Code!" and
it helps you software for public administrations but we must emphasize that digital sovereignty can
only be reached through Free Software and not by just replacing foreign yeah software products by
European ones and what we need is Free Software first rules so "Public Money? Public Code!" rules
in place we need "Public Money? Public Code!" legislation across Europe reflecting that Free Software
is a cornerstone of our digital infrastructure and the prerequisite for digital sovereignty
and also we need implementation of those rules so once we have it it must be implemented
we as Free Software foundation Europe we push for that we push for Free Software becoming the
standard and the default and public administration and we also try to be watch docs around public
money public code when we see development in the wrong direction you already mentioned quite a
lot of the challenges that are ahead of us or that we are currently facing in regard to public code
and public administrations Patrick can you also from your perspective are those challenges
very similar or are they different what do you think about that yeah I I can definitely recognize
the challenges that that Johannes mentioned so so yeah it's it's pretty easy to agree with them
if I think about what we are doing at me is maybe our challenges they are a little bit different
so so right now or not only right now but but in general one of our goals is to find new
user countries new use cases for for extra than in general these products so that we we could
find new new members for these because of course new organizations and new countries are
dividing the development costs the less it costs for everyone so everyone benefits but in
Europe it's often quite challenging to sell or or market an existing open source solution that
is already widely used like like X-Road so even if it it already has a proven crack record it's
being actively maintained and developed and so on but still many countries are a little bit
hesitant in adopting solutions developed by others so instead of using some existing open source software
quite often they seem to prefer developing their own solutions which is of course it's not the
most efficient way of doing things because in instead of developing something new that you
probably also have to maintain by yourself you would you could use something that already exists
is being developed is being managed it has a community and and so on so one of our biggest
challenges is that kind of an approach to open source so because I found this really interesting
and it points out that what we need also is a culture change in how we think about our
digital infrastructures and about procurement and about how to how to get solutions and this
so right now probably many decision makers many public administrations think of Free Software
as you start doing things from the scratch this can be an option but this is not really how things
should work if there's something a really good product like X-Road out so Free Software is much
more about cooperation about doing things together about contributing back and then yeah everyone
profits from what is being done and this is also part of this culture change that has to reach our
public administrations yeah exactly that's that's very important because still today
sometimes you you can see cases where an organization says that yeah we are we
every time everything that we develop we publish it as open source and it means that they
publish the code in GitHub using some open source license but then that's it there's no
community there's no way to contribute back and there's no visibility to the back lock road map
or anything like that so basically yes the code is licensed under the open source license but
still if you think about the whole development model it's not really open source
absolutely right so if also if we talk about procurement and this is where a lot of work has to
be done to get to a sustainable digital infrastructure based on Free Software there are ways of
going in that direction that you mentioned so you can you can use procurement criteria that
helps you finding the best solutions that are already out there instead of reinventing the
wheel and starting from scratch again and again or ending up with some with some solution that
doesn't have a community around it or maybe is developed by yeah by just a single vendor and you
also end up in new dependencies I like this approach or this thought about the cultural change
and I find this very intriguing on the one hand I think a lot of administrations or public
administrations see this need they are like we need a community we can't do everything on our own
that's why we can't use Free Software on the other hand all of them argue oh this software this
is not it's not tailored for my needs and I need a tailored software so I find this very interesting
because public administrations are quite a curious living being sometimes even so they are not
a person in itself but they have a certain culture and a certain attitude they bring along
but how do you push for wider adoption of Free Software and public administration
and a general approach and also to get more countries to collaborate with each other not
specifically only talking about needs now but also in a general point of view how do we get
this collaboration this community starting here and public administrations using Free Software
yeah very broad question yeah that's yeah very very broad question and yeah very very challenging one
but yeah I guess there is no simple solution to that or or single solution to that but at least one
aspect is that maybe we should try to communicate the benefits of three software better and what's
the difference compared to commercial software what what do the organizations and countries gain
by switching from switching to the Free Software because eventually everyone wants to have
better services and spend less money so yeah we should try to demonstrate how that can be achieved
yeah but at the same time it's I think it's also important to communicate that even if we talk
about Free Software of course it's it's not completely free because someone still needs to run it
set it up operate it and so on so of course it costs sometimes it may cost less while other times
it the price might be the same but still you get the freedom you get the digital
sovereignty so even if the price would be the same you still get more more value to it and I think
these are things that probably not not all parties see it and it it might help the cause to
communicate more about this point of view yeah absolutely and this is I think what we do at the
Free Software Foundation Europe so pushing for "Public Money? Public Code!" we work on the political
and on the public framework to push for wider adoption so as I said we want to have Free Software
and public administration so of course we we have good arguments we try to carry them out we try
to convince decision makers and politicians to get to to come up with with Free Software first
approaches in policies for example on the European level there's a procurement reform going on
and for the first time there will be something like strategic procurement procurement in future
after this reform will allow to have strategic criteria not only the lowest bit or the lowest
price as criterion and we argue that yeah the digital sovereignty through Free Software should be
one criterion that should be possible and that should definitely be in there and should enable
procurement offices in future to opt for Free Software solutions even if there's a same price or if
there are more expensive than proprietary solutions yeah so we tried then also if we have a regulation
like this in place and laws like this in place we try to push for implementation yeah and of course
it really really helps us to have best practices at hand so it's really convincing for our
politicians if we can tell of examples like X-Road and show them how "Public Money? Public Code!" how
Free Software and public administrations works and how it can work at scale so not not just side
projects but and I think X-Road really shows that how it can work at scale in practice across
several countries with a lot of yeah really good success yeah at the same time what we need is
long-term secure funding so at the at the moment this is not the case there's no there is not
not enough money for Free Software if you look at the budgets across Europe it has to be a standard
that we finance our digital infrastructure and the digital sovereignty of our digital infrastructure
Free Software with enough money in the long run so to get a stable foundation it's absolutely what we
need and yeah at the same time if we look at what we have been spending or if what we are still
spending today on proprietary licenses these are billions every year and I think it should absolutely
be possible to cut that and move some and move even larger parts of that money to
yeah sustaining Free Software for public administration what the harness was just referring to was that
it was published in Germany how much is spent by the federal administration so not all
administration because Germany is Germany's federal country so we have Schleswig-Holstein
as Bundesland obviously but we also have like very small money supealities who all maintain
their own infrastructure but the federal administration they just published how much they spent on
Microsoft licenses and in general on software licenses as well which was a lot of money you
haven't seen you have the number I think something something around 500 million just for
Microsoft licenses yeah not reflecting the debates around digital sovereignty
and this is definitely something that has to change but it's not only the case in Germany of course
we see the same across Europe so a lot of money is being spent on proprietary software on not only
Microsoft products also other proprietary vendors database or for example and there's a lot of money
in that market if we really take digital sovereignty seriously if we really take it seriously that we as
Europe must take control of our own digital infrastructure then we should try to put this money
into Free Software into "Public Money? Public Code!" I like that I take this as a closing word because
it's a very nice thing very positive how can our listeners help here how can they support how can
they support X-Road how can they support knees how yeah how can they jump in the Terry
well this applies to X-Road knees and and all the all the open source projects out there so the
best way to support any open source project is to contribute what else and I want to highlight that
contributing doesn't necessarily mean code contribution so in order to contribute you don't
necessarily have to be a developer there are also a lot of other things that you can do for X-Road or
other open source projects related to documentation or example that doesn't require coding skills so
if you want to get involved with X-Road or any other open source projects then join the community
familiarize with yourself with the project and then look for things that you're
interested in and then contact the project and tell them that you would be willing to
contribute and it doesn't have to be code and I'm pretty sure that all the all the project
maintainers they are were very happy to receive this kind of request at least at
knees we are very happy when when someone wants to join the community and especially when they
want to contribute perfect thank you so much oh can I just add one thing there actually three
things that I would like our our listeners to do yeah so and also thank you thank you very much
Peter yeah I think what you said is absolutely important and this this kind of contributions are
really really helpful from from my perspective I would I would really appreciate if our listeners if
all of you could be very very aware of the debates of around digital sovereignty and try to
notice when this debate is going into that buy-European direction and jump in and speak in and tell
the ones that say okay it's enough that we buy European products no matter if they're proprietary
tell them no it has to be Free Software only that software makes us digital sovereign digitally
sovereign in the end so jump in because I think this is this is important at the moment the other
two things are really simple so you could go to public code dot you that's our campaign work website
of "Public Money? Public Code!" so public code dot you I think it's also in the show notes and sign
our open letter that we have there so help us to get over 40,000 signatories which we are close
to at the moment and the last thing is we as Free Software Foundation Europe we really rely on donations
we really rely on the help of our supporters so please go to fsfe.org slash donate and become a
supporter of the Free Software Foundation Europe so support our work it's what we rely on this is our
backbone backbone of our work and only if we have enough supporters we can continue continue doing
this kind of work so please help us with that becoming support now you're taking away my closing
now I have to think of anyone no but it's absolutely true we are a charity that depend on your support so
if you like our work and if you want us to continue pushing for "Public Money? Public Code!"
the meaning Free Software in public administrations please support us we do this on a European level
as Johannes has already mentioned be advocate for Free Software long term funding and we can only do this
if we have enough support by our dear dear listeners and all the others if you cannot support us
financially you can of course join extra in the community make yourself familiar with the project first
don't just drop LLM generated documentation or code request at least review them before
there are loads of ways to get active and yeah thank you so much for your support there
and to the two of you thank you so much for being here thank you so much for taking the time
walking me through all of this quite a lot we have touched up on today very happy that we had to
talk about public code and public administrations and a lot of new insights for me thank you so much
thank you Bonnie thank you Peter thank you for having me it was a very interesting conversation
thank you it was a pleasure to have both of you here thank you so much bye bye
this was the software freedom podcast if you like this episode please recommend it to your friends
and rate it they tuned for more inspiring conversations that explored the importance of software
freedom and its impact on our digital lives this podcast is presented to you by the Free Software
Foundation Europe we are a charity that works on promoting software freedom if you like our work
please consider supporting us for the nation you find more information under fsfe.org/donate
thank you so much bye bye